Welcome back to the course, we will now start
learning how to find that topological ordering
we've been talking about. In this chapter, we will
learn two algorithms to do so, one that uses dfs,
and one that uses bfs. We will start with
the dfs one, we discuss it in this lecture.
Let's suppose that we have this graph, it's
the example we will work with. An important
thing to keep in mind for this algorithm
is that in a valid topological ordering,
if we put a vertex u at a certain position,
then all its outgoing neighbors, in other
words vertices whose u is a prerequisite for, must
come after it, because u must happen before them,
it's a prerequisite, you need to understand
this. Now imagine that we want to search for
courses that can be taken at the end. Can 0
be the last course we take? No, because it's
a prerequisite of courses 3 and 6, so 3 and 6
must come AFTER it, 0 cannot be the last one.
So let's go to its outgoing neighbors,
we insert them, then we go back to 0.
We move to 6. Can 6 be the last course? Once
again, no, it has outgoing neighbors that we
didn't insert yet, they must come after 6. Here
again, we move to them, then we go back to 6.
We move to 9. Can 9 be at the end? No it
has outgoing neighbors, we traverse them.
We move to 12. Can 12 be at the end? Yes, it
can, because it has no outgoing neighbors,
nothing needs to come after it,
we can safely put 12 at the end.
We go back to 9, and we move to the second
outgoing neighbor, 10. Can it be the before
last course? No, because it's a prerequisite
for 12 and 14, so we first need to put them.
12 is already inserted but
not 14, so we move to 14.
Can we put 14? Yes, it has no outgoing neighbors,
we can safely take it, we put it in the ordering.
Back to 10, now we've inserted all its outgoing
neighbors, we can insert it now, we put 10.
You can see that 14 is after 10 in the
ordering, as required by the constraints,
this is why we first went to 14 then we went
back to insert 10. Back to 9, we've inserted
all its outgoing neighbors, both 12 and 10,
we can now safely put it in the next position.
Back to 6, we've inserted 9, but not 7 yet, we
go to it. The only outgoing neighbor of 7 is 10,
and it's already visited, so it's
already in the ordering, we can put 7.
You can see that we're building the
order of vertices in reverse order,
we've started by the last course to take,
then the before last one, and so on.
Back to 6, we've inserted all outgoing
neighbors, we can insert it. Back
to 0, we move to the second neighbor, 3. 3 has two
neighbors, and they're both visited, so they're
both in the ordering, we can safely put 3. Back
to 0, we've inserted both neighbors, we can put 0.
And we finished the call on 0. But
we didn't traverse all vertices,
because not all vertices are reachable
from 0, we start again from unvisited ones.
Next vertex is 1, not visited. 1 has one neighbor,
3, and it's inserted, so we can directly insert 1,
and we finished the call. Next vertex, 2. 2 has
two neighbors 4 and 5, we first insert them. We
start with 4. 4 has three neighbors 3 7 and 8. 3
and 7 are inserted, but we still need to go to 8.
8 has one neighbor 11, we go to it. 11
has one neighbor 14, and it's visited,
so we directly insert 11, and we go back. Back
to 8, we inserted neighbors, we can put the 8.
Back to 4, we can insert it. Back to 2, we
still need to move to its second neighbor, 5.
It has two neighbors, both visited, we
directly insert it. Back to 2, we insert it.
We continue next vertices now, 3, visited,
4 visited, 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12, all visited.
Next unvisited is 13. It has one neighbor,
which is visited, we directly insert 13.
End of call for 13. Remaining vertices are 14, and
it's visited. We finished the process, we've been
able to build a valid topological ordering,
we got 13 2 5 4 8 11 1 0 3 6 7 9 10 14 12.
By taking courses in this order,
we respect all prerequisites,
you can see that for each vertex, all its
outgoing neighbors are positioned after it.
Okay what happened here? We're inserting vertices
starting from the end right? We want to find the
last vertex in the ordering then the one
before it then the one before it and so on.
But to insert a vertex, all its outgoing
vertices must already be inserted starting
from the right, so that they can be
after it in the ordering. For that,
we decided to first insert neighbors,
then we insert the actual vertex.
But to insert neighbors, we first need to insert
their neighbors. And so on and so on. And this
process uses depth-first search, we initially want
to insert a vertex, doing so requires us to insert
its neighbors, inserting them requires
us to insert their neighbors, and so on.
Before moving to the implementation, we need
to discuss what structure do we use. We're
inserting vertices in the ordering in reverse
order, the last course that gets inserted is
the first one that will be taken, we're
working on a Last In First Out principle.
And what structure uses LIFO principle?
The stack, we will use a stack. Every
time we want to insert a vertex, we
add it on top of the stack, then, at
the end we just keep popping to get the
topological sort in the right order.
Let's start implementing. We need a function dfs()
that takes as parameters the graph, the actual
vertex, the set of visited vertices, and new
parameter: the stack. We add the actual vertex to
visited, but we don't push it onto the stack yet,
we first need to insert its neighbors. This is
why we traverse neighbors, for each neighbor, if
it's not in visited, we call dfs on it to insert.
After we finish inserting all outgoing neighbors,
we can insert the actual vertex, we push it onto
the stack. Letting this instruction after
the loop is very important, remember that
we first need to push outgoing neighbors,
to have them after vertex in the ordering.
Note that we could let the instruction of
adding the vertex to visited after the loop,
so that visited would mean that the vertex is
inserted, but don't worry both methods work.
And in the main topological_sort()
function, we create visited,
we create the stack, then here we need
to call dfs on each unvisited vertex,
as we did with classic dfs we've seen
previously, to visit all the vertices.
For each vertex in graph, if it's not visited,
we call dfs on it. After the loop, the stack is
ready. We create an array ordering, then we keep
popping from the stack and adding to ordering.
At the end, we just return ordering, we got our
topological sort, we implemented our solution.
However, this one assumes that the graph doesn't
have cycles, that it has a topological order.
But what if it has a cycle, what would happen? We
have this graph. We start with 0, can we insert
it, no we first need to insert its neighbors. We
go to 1, to insert it, we first need to insert
2. We go to 2, to insert it, we first need to
insert 3. We go to 3, to insert it, we first
need to insert 1. We go to 1, to insert it, we
first need to insert 2. We go to 2, to insert it,
we first need to insert 3. It will continue like
that forever, each vertex is waiting for the other
to end while we have mutual dependencies. What
is the solution then? The solution then is to
be able to detect that there is a cycle, to stop
and say that a topological sort is not possible.
We know that there is a cycle when we find
something called a back edge. A back edge is
an edge that goes from the actual vertex to
a vertex that is already in the actual path,
where the actual path represents the sequence of
adjacent vertices we traversed from the source
to the actual vertex. For example here we start
from 0, the actual path is 0. Then we move to 1,
the actual path is 0-1. Then we move to 2,
the actual path is 0-1-2. Then we move to 3,
the actual path is 0-1-2-3. Then here, we have an
edge that takes us from the vertex 3 to the vertex
1, the vertex 1 that is already in the path,
so it's a back edge, we deduce that we have a
cycle. And in fact, we have a cycle, the cycle
1-2-3. Here is another example of a back edge.
How to adapt our solution to detect back edges?
For that we need to keep track of vertices that
are in the actual path, we also need to make
our dfs function return a boolean that says if
yes or no we've been able to successfully
perform the topological sort algorithm,
in other words, if we didn't find any back edge.
The set visited doesn't change, but now we also
need a set path that holds the vertices of the
path from the initial vertex to the actual one.
The difference between them is that once
a vertex is visited, it remains visited
for the whole process, and a vertex enters path
when we go to it, but just before we backtrack,
we remove it, because it won't be a part of the
path anymore, we will take another direction.
In code we add a new parameter path. Then we add
vertex to visited, but we also add it to the path,
we add a vertex to path as soon as we go
to it. Now we traverse neighbors. In the
previous solution we had only two cases,
neighbor visited and neighbor not visited,
that's it, we had no path to check in, no
result to check. Which is not the case here,
knowing if the neighbor is in the path is
important, and the result of calling dfs on
the neighbor is also important, because it says
if we found a back edge by going from there.
Okay we have our neighbor, we start by checking
if it's in path. If it's the case, then we found a
back edge. And having a back edge means that there
is a problem, we cannot continue the topological
sort process, we return false. Else if it's not
in path, we move to other conditions. We check if
it's visited. If it's the case, we do nothing, we
just continue to the next neighbor, we just skip
this one. And if it's not visited, we call dfs
on it to continue from there and fill the stack.
Now this dfs call returns a boolean, if it's true
then we found no problem by going from there,
and if it's false then there is a back edge.
So if dfs call returns true, we just continue
to the next neighbor, else if it's false, we
return false, because we couldn't successfully
perform the algorithm, there is a cycle. We have
this decision tree, in code we can implement it
with this condition, if neighbor in path or
(neighbor not in visited and not dfs, means
dfs returns false), we return false. Else we just
move to the next neighbor in the next iteration.
And if we've been able to traverse neighbors
without finding any problem, what do we do,
we add the vertex to the stack as we did earlier,
but here we also remove it from the path, and we
return true. We remove from the path because we're
about to backtrack, and true because we found no
problems. Now in the main solution function, we
create a set visited, another set path, the stack,
and we start traversing vertices. For each vertex,
if it's not visited, we call dfs on it. But this
time we check the result, if it returns false
then there is a cycle, we can't find a topological
sort, we can for example return an empty array.
And if everything goes well, after the loop,
we pop elements of the stack into ordering
array and we return it, as we did previously.
And we got our topological_sort() solution that
handles the case where the graph has a cycle,
it avoids the infinite recursion. It can also be
used to specifically detect cycles, we can call
this function on a graph, and if the graph is not
empty and this function returns an empty array,
it means that it found a cycle, this is why
it couldn't build a topological ordering,
we deduce that there is a cycle in the graph.
This is why in the previous lecture I told you
that topological sort algorithms can
be used to detect cycles in graphs.
What about time complexity? You can see
that except some additional instructions,
we're performing a classic depth-first search.
Additional instructions don't affect the time
complexity here, adding to path is in O(1) in
average, same thing for checking if it's in path,
removing from the path, same thing, and
for the loop that pops from the stack,
it does |V| iterations, because the stack
contains all vertices, and we have |V| vertices.
Remember that dfs has an O(|V|+|E|)
time complexity, and these additional
instructions don't affect it, so we get an
O(|V|+|E|) time complexity for this solution.
And for the space complexity, we
have |V| for visited, |V| for path,
|V| for the stack and ordering, and |V| for the
call stack, we get an O(|V|) space complexity.
We reached the end of this lecture, I hope that
you understood this topological sort algorithm.
If you didn't, you can ask me questions. See
you in the next lecture to discuss another
top sort algorithm, based on bfs, Kahn's
algorithm. See you in the next lecture.